<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For more detailed observations on these points refer to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Volkens, “Uber die Karolinen Insel Yap,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="de">Verhandlungen Gesellschaft Erdkunde Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span> (1901); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Kubary, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Ethnographische Beitrage zur Kentniss des Karolinen Archipel</i> (Leiden, 1889⁠–⁠1892); <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">De Abrade Historia del Conflicto de las Carolinas</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (Madrid, 1886). <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>William Beebe, the famous American naturalist and ornithologist, recently fighting in France with America’s air force, called attention to this remarkable belief in an article printed not long ago in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Atlantic Monthly</i>. Still more significant was it that he noted a persistent rumour that the breaking out of the buried race was close. <cite>—⁠<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. J. B.</abbr>, <abbr>Pres.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">I.A.</abbr> of <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Later I was to find that Murian reckoning rested upon the extraordinary increased luminosity of the cliffs at the time of full moon on Earth⁠—this action, to my mind, being linked either with the effect of the light streaming globes upon the Moon Pool, whose source was in the shining cliffs, or else upon some mysterious affinity of their radiant element with the flood of moonlight on Earth⁠—the latter, most probably, because even when the moon must have been clouded above, it made no difference in the phenomenon. Thirteen of these shinings forth constituted a <i xml:lang="x-murian">laya</i>, one of them a <i xml:lang="x-murian">lat</i>. Ten was <i xml:lang="x-murian">sa</i>; ten times ten times ten a <i xml:lang="x-murian">said</i>, or thousand; ten times a thousand was a <i xml:lang="x-murian">sais</i>. A <i xml:lang="x-murian">sais</i> of <i xml:lang="x-murian">laya</i> was then literally ten thousand years. What we would call an hour was by them called a <i xml:lang="x-murian">va</i>. The whole time system was, of course, a mingling of time as it had been known to their remote, surface-dwelling ancestors, and the peculiar determining factors in the vast cavern. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Unquestionably there is a subtle difference between time as we know it and time in this subterranean land⁠—its progress there being slower. This, however, is only in accord with the well-known doctrine of relativity, which predicates both space and time as necessary inventions of the human mind to orient itself to the conditions under which it finds itself. I tried often to measure this difference, but could never do so to my entire satisfaction. The closest I can come to it is to say that an hour of our time is the equivalent of an hour and five-eighths in Muria. For further information upon this matter of relativity the reader may consult any of the numerous books upon the subject. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have no space here even to outline the eschatology of this people, nor to catalogue their pantheon. Siya and Siyana typified worldly love. Their ritual was, however, singularly free from those degrading elements usually found in love-cults. Priests and priestesses of all cults dwelt in the immense seven-terraced structure, of which the jet amphitheatre was the water side. The symbol, icon, representation, of Siya and Siyana⁠—the globe and the up-striving figures⁠—typified earthly love, feet bound to earth, but eyes among the stars. Hell or heaven I never heard formulated, nor their equivalents; unless that existence in the Shining One’s domain could serve for either. Over all this was Thanaroa, remote; unheeding, but still maker and ruler of all⁠—an absentee First Cause personified! Thanaroa seemed to be the one article of belief in the creed of the soldiers⁠—Rador, with his reverence for the Ancient Ones, was an exception. Whatever there was, indeed, of high, truly religious impulse among the Murians, this far, High God had. I found this exceedingly interesting, because it had long been my theory⁠—to put the matter in the shape of a geometrical formula⁠—that the real attractiveness of gods to man increases uniformly according to the square of their distance⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr> <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I find that I have neglected to explain the working of these interesting mechanisms that were telephonic, dictaphonic, telegraphic in one. I must assume that my readers are familiar with the receiving apparatus of wireless telegraphy, which must be “tuned” by the operator until its own vibratory quality is in exact harmony with the vibrations⁠—the extremely rapid impacts⁠—of those short electric wavelengths we call Hertzian, and which carry the wireless messages. I must assume also that they are familiar with the elementary fact of physics that the vibrations of light and sound are interchangeable. The hearing-talking globes utilize both these principles, and with consummate simplicity. The light with which they shone was produced by an atomic “motor” within their base, similar to that which activated the merely illuminating globes. The composition of the phonic spheres gave their surfaces an acute sensitivity and resonance. In conjunction with its energizing power, the metal set up what is called a “field of force,” which linked it with every particle of its kind no matter how distant. When vibrations of speech impinged upon the resonant surface its rhythmic light-vibrations were broken, just as a telephone transmitter breaks an electric current. Simultaneously these light-vibrations were changed into sound⁠—on the surfaces of all spheres tuned to that particular instrument. The “crawling” colours which showed themselves at these times were literally the voice of the speaker in its spectrum equivalent. While usually the sounds produced required considerable familiarity with the apparatus to be understood quickly, they could, on occasion, be made startlingly loud and clear⁠—as I was soon to realize⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr> <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A <i xml:lang="x-murian">tal</i> in Muria is the equivalent of thirty hours of Earth surface time. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Akka are viviparous. The female produces progeny at five-year intervals, never more than two at a time. They are monogamous, like certain of our own Ranidae. Pending my monograph upon what little I had time to learn of their interesting habits and customs, the curious will find instruction and entertainment in Brandes and Schvenichen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Brutpfleige der Schwanzlosen Bat Rachier</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 395; and Lilian <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Sampson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unusual Modes of Breeding Among Anura</i>, <abbr>Amer. Nat.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>, 1900. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Yekta of the Crimson Sea, are as extraordinary developments of hydroid forms as the giant Medusae, of which, of course, they are not too remote cousins. The closest resemblances to them in outer water forms are among the Gymnoblastic Hydroids, notably <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Clavetella prolifera</i>, a most interesting ambulatory form of six tentacles. Almost every bather in Southern waters, Northern too, knows the pain that contact with certain “jelly fish” produces. The <i xml:lang="x-murian">Yekta’s</i> development was prodigious and, to us, monstrous. It secretes in its five heads an almost incredibly swiftly acting poison which I suspect, for I had no chance to verify the theory, destroys the entire nervous system to the accompaniment of truly infernal agony; carrying at the same time the illusion that the torment stretches through infinities of time. Both ether and nitrous oxide gas produce in the majority this sensation of time extension, without of course the pain symptom. What Lakla called the Yekta kiss is I imagine about as close to the orthodox idea of Hell as can be conceived. The secret of her control over them I had no opportunity of learning in the rush of events that followed. Knowledge of the appalling effects of their touch came, she told me, from those few “who had been kissed so lightly” that they recovered. Certainly nothing, not even the Shining One, was dreaded by the Murians as these were. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reprinted in full in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Nature</i>, in which those sufficiently interested may peruse it. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Professor Svante August Arrhenius, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Worlds in the Making</i>⁠—the conception that life is universally diffused, constantly emitted from all habitable worlds in the form of spores which traverse space for years and ages, the majority being ultimately destroyed by the heat of some blazing star, but some few finding a resting-place on globes which have reached the habitable stage. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">W. T. G.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
