<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="foreword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Foreword</h2>
			<p>The publication of the following narrative of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Walter <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Goodwin has been authorized by the Executive Council of the International Association of Science.</p>
			<p>First:</p>
			<p>To end officially what is beginning to be called the Throckmartin Mystery and to kill the innuendo and scandalous suspicions which have threatened to stain the reputations of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> David Throckmartin, his youthful wife, and equally youthful associate <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Charles Stanton ever since a tardy despatch from Melbourne, Australia, reported the disappearance of the first from a ship sailing to that port, and the subsequent reports of the disappearance of his wife and associate from the camp of their expedition in the Caroline Islands.</p>
			<p>Second:</p>
			<p>Because the Executive Council have concluded that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Goodwin’s experiences in his wholly heroic effort to save the three, and the lessons and warnings within those experiences, are too important to humanity as a whole to be hidden away in scientific papers understandable only to the technically educated; or to be presented through the newspaper press in the abridged and fragmentary form which the space limitations of that vehicle make necessary.</p>
			<p>For these reasons the Executive Council commissioned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Merritt to transcribe into form to be readily understood by the layman the stenographic notes of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Goodwin’s own report to the Council, supplemented by further oral reminiscences and comments by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Goodwin; this transcription, edited and censored by the Executive Council of the Association, forms the contents of this book.</p>
			<p>Himself a member of the Council, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Walter <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Goodwin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ph. D.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">F.R.G.S.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, is without cavil the foremost of American botanists, an observer of international reputation and the author of several epochal treaties upon his chosen branch of science. His story, amazing in the best sense of that word as it may be, is fully supported by proofs brought forward by him and accepted by the organization of which I have the honor to be president. What matter has been elided from this popular presentation⁠—because of the excessively menacing potentialities it contains, which unrestricted dissemination might develop⁠—will be dealt with in purely scientific pamphlets of carefully guarded circulation.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">The International Association of Science</p>
				<p>Per <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">J. B. K.</abbr>, President</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
